
gEDA: gschem 
User Guide

Written by: Ales Hvezda
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Contents:

	1. Introduction
	2. Overview
	3. Running gschem
	4. User interface
	5. Basic operations
	6. Files used/created by gschem 
	7. Electrical connectivity
	8. Dialog boxes (TBA)
	9. Components/symbols (TBA) 
	10. Attributes (TBA)
	11. Resource File (TBA)



1. Introduction

	This is a very basic and crude first attempt at getting some
real user docs written for gschem.  This document is hardly finished or
polished but it is better than having no docs at all (which was the
case for the longest time).  Please forgive the tone of this document;
I (Ales) am writing this just to get something done.  I am by no means
a technical writer so I am sure some of my sentences are truly awful.
As everybody says, programmers should not write documentation for their
programs and this document is a perfect illustration of a programmer
breaking that rule.  Please report any errors/inconsistencies to
ahvezda@geda.seul.org

	This document assumes you know understand basic schematic capture,
like you understand that a component represents something and that nets
and buses interconnect these components to form a schematic etc...  
Eventually this document will describe all this in more detail, but for 
now this document is will describe how schematic capture is accomplished
in the gEDA system.



2. Overview

	gschem is the schematic capture program in the gEDA tool suite.
It's sole purpose is facilitate the input of circuit schematics or
block diagrams graphically.  gschem is also the symbols editor for the
gEDA system.  This is possible because the schematic format and symbol 
format are exactly the same.



3. Running gschem

	Running gschem is straightforward once you have installed it
on your GNU/Linux or UNIX system.

	The first step is to build and install the gEDA tools.
This step is not covered in this document.  You can tell if you have
installed the tools correctly by running the following commands:

	libgeda-config --version
	gesym-config --version
	which gschem
	ldd `which gschem`

	The first two should return the version of the installed tools
(libgeda and the symbol library) and the next command should return
the path to the gschem binary.	The final command (only on GNU/Linux
systems) will return which libraries are linked to gschem; all of the
request libraries must be found for gschem to run.  If these commands
do not return the expected results, then most likely the gEDA tools are
not installed properly.  Please see the appropriate INSTALL docs (which
came with the distribution) for more info on installing the gEDA tools.

	To run gschem type:

	gschem 

	at any shell prompt.

	To look at an example schematic which came with gschem run:

	gschem schematic_name.sch

	For a listing of the various command line flags type:

	gschem -h

	For a detailed explanation of the command line flags look
at the gschem man page (man gschem).	



4. User interface

	There are several ways to interact with gschem.  gschem
requires a keyboard and mouse.  There are three ways to initiate an 
operation or command:

	Using the mouse to select the operation off a menu 
	
			-- or --

	Typing the keyboard hotkey(s).

			-- or --

	Draw the appropriate stroke (if stroke support is enabled)

	To make usage matters more confusing, selecting an operation
off of the menus behaves slightly differently than typing the hotkey.
Most of the operations operate on the currently selected object(s),
hence you need to select the object first before manipulating them.
The menu selected operations usually require some more input (usually
a mouse click) after they are picked off of the menu.  The keyboard
hotkey operations take that required input as the current mouse position.
This saves an extra click since you can position the mouse at the right
place, type in the hotkey(s), and the command then executes.  Note, you can
change this so that both menu and hotkey behavior is exactly the same.
See the section on the resource file for more info on how to configure
this.

	Most of the interaction with gschem is fairly modal (modes like
command/editing similar to the great text editor vi).  If you select
operations off of the menu, the you are placed into corresponding mode
(like copy/move mode).  You must then select an anchor point (or whatever
the appropriate point is) to continue the operation.  Most of the commands
off of the menu expect the objects to be already selected.

	The hotkeys are also modal in nature.  Most of the default
hotkeys are for the various commands are not single keystrokes. 
There are a few which are single keystrokes (like zoom in: `z' or
pan: `x'), but most are typically two keystrokes long.	As examples,
to execute File/Save you would type `f' and `s' (without the quotes)
or Add/Line is `a' and `l'.  You can get a listing of the hotkeys by
picking Help/Hotkeys.  The hotkeys are defined in the resource files
(system-gschemrc, ~/.gEDA/gschemrc, or `pwd`/gschemrc).  See the section
on the resource file for more info.

	The mouse button actions in gschem are mostly configurable.
The first mouse button is always used to select objects or pick points.
This button is not configurable.  The second mouse button is either a
copy/move action (when held down over an object) or a repeat last command
or draw a stroke to execute a command.  The third mouse button is either
a mouse pan (when held down as the mouse is moved) or a popup dialog box.
The behavior of the second and third mouse buttons is controlled through
the resource file (see the section below for more info).



5. Basic Operations

	There are seven kinds of operations in gschem:

	a. File related (Open/Close/Save/Print etc...)
	b. Addition of objects (Add nets/lines/pins/components etc...)
	c. Manipulate objects (move/copy/delete/rotate/mirror etc...)
	d. View operations (Zoom/Pan/Redraw etc...)
	e. Hierarchy operations (Down Schematic/Down Symbol/Up)
	f. Attribute operations (Attach/Detach/Toggle visibility etc...)
	g. Option changing (text size/gridding/snap etc...)

	This section will describe each of these.

	The terms page and schematic both refer to the same thing (a
	collection of objects that are loaded and being displayed).
	A window is that big window in which schematics are displayed
	and manipulated.


	a. File related operations:

	New Window

		Open a new window.  Each window is totally separate from 
		all other windows.

	New Page

		Open a new page.  Usually this page will be called
		untitled_N.sch, where N is an incrementing number.

	Open Page...

		Open an page from disk.  This will pop up a dialog box.
		Please see the later section on how to use the more
		advance features of this dialog box.

	Close Page

		Close the currently displayed page.  This will prompt
		you to save if you have modified the page.


	Revert Page

		Close and reopen the currently displayed page.  This will
		not prompt you to save the current page, but will quickly
		discard any changes you have made and reopen the saved 
		schematic from disk.  Use with caution.
	
	Save Page

		Save the page current page.  If the page is called
		untitled_N.sch (where N is a integer), then a Save
		As... dialog box will appear.

	Save Page as...

		Opens the Save As.. dialog box.  Clicking Save As will
		save the currently displayed schematic.  The displayed
		schematic will be called the new specified name.

	Save All

		Unconditionally saves all schematics loaded in memory.

	Print...

		Brings up the Print dialog box.  Please see the dialog
		box section for more info on this.

	Write PNG...
	
		Brings up the Write PNG dialog box.  Please see the
		dialog box section for more info on this.

	Close Window

		Closes the current window.  If there are any modified
		schematics, a "Are you sure" dialog box will appear.
		Clicking OK will cause all unsaved schematics to be lost.

	Quit gschem	

		Like Close window, but close all opened window.  A "Are
		you sure" dialog box will appear for each window which
		has unsaved schematics

	Page Manager

		Brings up a dialog box which lets you pick pages as well
		as see various info about the pages loaded in memory.
		Please see the dialog box section for more info on this.

	Page Next
	Page Prev

		These two options allow you to move in between opened pages.

	Page Discard

		Closes the current schematic forcefully.  If the current
		schematic is NOT saved then the data is lost forever.
		You will NOT be prompted or warned if you have modified
		the current displayed schematic.  Use with caution.
		Useful if you want to unload a schematic quickly.


	b. Addition of objects:

	An object is one of the following: line, circle, pin, net,
	box, bus, text/attribute, and component.  A component is a
	collection of lines, circles, pins, boxes, text, and attributes.

	Add Component

		Opens up a dialog box which lets you place components from
		the component libraries.  

		To place a component do the following:

			Select a Component library (which btw is specified
			in the Resource files, see section below) from the
			left list	

			Select a Component from the right list.

			Move the mouse into the main drawing window (you
			should see an outline). 

			Press the first mouse button to place the component.

		If a component is already selected, hitting apply and
		moving the mouse into the main window will allow you to
		place that component again.

		To cancel a component place press the last mouse button or
		the ESC key.

		Please see the dialog box section for detailed information
		on this dialog box.

	Add Net

		Draws a net segment.  If you select this off of the top
		menu bar then:

			1. Press the first mouse button to start the net.
			2. Press the first mouse button to end the net.
			3. Another net will start at the last endpoint.
			4. Press the first mouse button to end that net etc...

			Press the last mouse button or ESC to cancel
			any net in progress.

		If you started this using the menu hotkey then the net
		start immediately at the last mouse position and then
		it behave exactly as above (except for line #1).

		After drawing a net segment (or segments) and canceling
		the last net segment, you are automatically placed in 
		select mode.  You must pick add net again or type the
		hotkey to add more nets.

		You can hold down the control key to draw non-orthogonal
		nets.  Just keep in mind that you cannot connect anything
		to the middle of a non-orthogonal net.

		The boxes at the end of the nets are connectivity cues.
		Filled boxes signified a dangling net (not connected to
		anything).  Filled circles are midpoint connections/junctions.
		These cues are drawn automatically and are an indicator
		of electrical connectivity.  

		See the section on electrical connectivity below for more
		information.
		
	Add Bus

		Basically the same thing as nets, except that it draws 
		buses.  Buses are very new and there are many aspects which
		are not defined yet, so keep that in mind as you uses buses.
		*More to be added here eventually*

	Add Attribute...

		Brings up the add attribute dialog box.  This dialog
		box is ONLY used to add attributes.  It does not display
		or manipulate already placed attributes.  This behavior will
		be changing shortly to be attribute edit as well.
		*This section of this doc is slightly dated*

		An attribute is nothing more than a text item which is
		in the form name=value (there cannot be any spaced to
		the left or right of the name,value pair).  It can be
		either unattached or attached.

		To add an unattached attribute do the following:

			1a. Select an attribute name off of the top list
					-- or --
			1b. Type in the attribute name into the name entry
			2. Type in a value for the attribute.
			3. Pick any of the attribute options.
			4. Click Apply and move the mouse into the main
		           window (an outline of the text should be seen)
			5. Press the first mouse button to place the 
			   attribute.  The text will be red which signifies
			   an unattached attribute

		If you want to attach an attribute to an object then
		select the desired object first and then press the
		add attribute apply button.  The text should be yellow
		which signifies an attached attribute.	If you click on
		an object which has attached attributes, the attached
		attributes should be selected as well.

		You cannot place an incomplete attribute (an attribute without
	   	a name and value).

		To cancel an attribute place press the last mouse button or
		the ESC key.

		Please see the section on attributes below for more info
		on how to use attributes and more details.

	Add Text

		Opens up the text add dialog box.  

		To place text: 

			1. Type in text in entry field
			2. Hit enter or click Apply
			3. Move the mouse into the main window (an outline of
		 	   the text should appear and follow the mouse)
			4. Press the first mouse button to place the text

		If you leave the text add dialog box open you can place
		the same text item again and again by just clicking apply
		(or pressing enter) and moving the mouse into the main
		window.

		Text which is placed will be automatically capitalized.  
		Please see the Resource file section below on how to control
		this behavior.

		To cancel a text place press the last mouse button or
		the ESC key.

		If you create text in the form name=value, then you are
		creating attributes.  gEDA allows for general attributes
		to be free floating (or unattached).  It is a good idea
		to change the color of these floating attributes to
		the current attribute color (which is also called the
		attached attribute color) to signify that this text item
		is an attribute.

	Add Line

		Draws a line in the same fashion as drawing nets with the
		following exceptions:

			- A line has no electrical significance
			- Only a single line is drawn 
			- You keep drawing lines as long as you are in 
			  line drawing mode.

		To cancel a line rubberband in progress press the last mouse
		button or the ESC key.
	
	Add Circle

		To draw a circle (picking Add Circle off of a menu):

			1. Pick the center of the circle with the first button
			2. Move the mouse to see an outline of the circle
			3. Press the first mouse button to finalize the circle

		To draw a circle (typing the hotkey), same as above except
		that the center of the circle is picked for you at the last
		mouse position when you type the hotkey.

		To cancel a circle rubberband in progress press the last mouse
		button or the ESC key.

	Add Arc

		To draw an arc (picking Add Arc off of a menu):

			1. Pick the center of the arc with first mouse button	
			2. Move the mouse and pick the next point.  The
			   rubberbanded line represents the radius
			3. A dialog box will appear: specify the start angle
			   (in degrees) and specify the degrees of sweep.
			4. Press OK to finalize the values.

		The start angle can be positive or negative.  The degrees
		are specified using the standard Cartesian coordinate
		system.  The degrees of sweep can be positive or negative.

		To cancel an arc in progress (while rubberband the radius)
		press the last mouse button or the ESC key or press the
		Cancel button in the arc dialog box.

	Add Pin

		Draws a pin in the same fashion as drawing nets with the
		following exception:

			- You keep drawing pins as long as you are in 
			  pins drawing mode.

		To cancel a pin rubberband in progress press the last mouse
		button or the ESC key.


	c. Manipulate objects:

	Most of these operations are modes which operate on the current
	selected objects.  Before you can execute the desired function
	you must select the objects you want to rotate.

	Select Mode

		Select mode is the initial mode gschem starts up in.

		In select mode you can select objects.  

		You can pick single objects by clicking on them.  If an object
		is already selected than clicking on that object will keep
		it selected.  If multiple objects overlap then clicking in 
		one spot will cycle through the objects.  

		If you hold down the SHIFT key and click, you can select
		and deselect multiple objects.	Doing this with multiple
		overlapping objects will cause the selection to cycle
		among the possible object selections.

		If you hold down the CONTROL key and click, you will
		toggle the object in and out of the current selection
		list.

		To select multiple objects press and hold the first
		mouse button and drag the mouse till a selection
		box appears.  Drag the mouse (selection box) till it
		encompasses the objects and release the first mouse
		button.  The objects must be completely encompassed.
		Using the selection box takes some practice.  If any
		previous objects were selected, they will be unselected.

		If you hold down the SHIFT key while drawing a selection
		box then you will add to the currently selected
		objects.  Objects cannot be removed using the selection 
		box and holding down the SHIFT key.

		If you hold down the CONTROL key while drawing a selection
		box then you will toggle any encompassed objects.
		If an object was selected then it will be unselected
		and vice versa.

		If you pick an object which has attributes which are
		attached to it, then these attributes will be selected
		as well.  If you just want to select the object, you must
		deselect the attributes.  Invisible attached attributes
		are also selected when you pick the object This behavior
		is handy if you want to manipulate/change an object and
		all of its attributes (moving/copying the object around).

		The selection mechanisms are not obvious and do require
		some practice.  There are some quirks so please report them
		as you come across them. 

	Edit...

		Allows you to edit:
			Text - brings up a dialog box which allows you to edit
	                the text string and size

			Attributes - a much more sophisticated version of 
		        above specifically for attributes.

			All attributes attached to a component - brings up a
			multi-attribute editing dialog box.

			1. Select the item (text/component) to edit.
			2. Pick or type the hotkeys for Edit/Edit...
			3. Make the appropriate change and press OK

		Note, only the item will be edited; bulk text/component
		editing is not supported (yet).

	Edit Text...

		Allows you to edit text only, irregardless if that text is
	        an attribute or just a plain text string.

			1. Select the text item text to edit.
			2. Pick or type the hotkeys for Edit/Edit Text...
			3. Make the appropriate change and press OK

		Note, only the item will be edited; bulk text editing 
		is not supported (yet).

	Copy Mode

		This mode allows you to copy the currently selected objects.

		To copy objects (picking Edit/Copy Mode off of a menu):

			1. Select the desired object(s)
			2. Pick Edit/Copy Mode off of a menu
			3. Pick an origin point for the copy (first button)
			4. Move the outline to the desired position
			5. Pick the destination point (first button)

		To copy objects using the hotkey for copy mode is almost
		the same as above except that the origin point is selected
		automatically for you once you hit the copy mode hotkey.

		After finishing the copy, you are automatically put back
		into to select mode.

		Holding down the CONTROL key as you move the outline
		around will constrain the movement to be either horizontal
		or vertical.

	Move Mode

		Move mode is just like copy (above) except that instead
		of copying you are actually moving the objects around.

	Delete

		Delete allows you to remove objects off of the page.
	
		To delete objects:

			1. Pick the desired object(s).
			2. Select or type the hotkey for Edit/Delete
			3. Objects will be deleted immediately	

		Use this with caution since there is NO undo yet!	

	Rotate 90 Mode

		Rotate mode allows you to rotate objects 90 degrees around
		a pivot/center point.

		To rotate objects (picking Edit/Rotate 90 Mode off of a menu):

			1. Pick the desired object(s).
			2. Select Edit/Rotate 90 Mode off of a menu
			3. Pick the pivot or center point of the rotate

		Rotating objects using the hotkey is similar to above except
		that the center point is the last mouse position at which
		you typed the hotkey.
		
		The objects will be rotate 90 counter clockwise.  You
		can keep rotate objects 90 degrees till you have them in
		the wanted rotation.  Text will always appear upright.

	Mirror Mode

		Mirror mode allows you to mirror objects horizontally
		around pivot.

		To rotate objects (picking Edit/Rotate 90 Mode off of a menu):

			1. Pick the desired object(s).
			2. Select Edit/Mirror Mode off of a menu
			3. Pick the pivot point of the mirror
	
		Mirroring objects using the hotkey is similar to above except
		that the pivot point is the last mouse position at which you
		typed the hotkey. 

		Objects are mirrored horizontally about the pivot point.
		If you want to get a vertical mirror then rotate and mirror
		the object(s) till you get the desired position.

		Mirroring of embedded components is not supported.

	Stretch

		Stretch allows you to change the end points of nets.

		To stretch a net (picking Edit/Stretch off of a menu):

			1. Pick the desired net.
			2. Select Edit/Stretch Mode off of a menu
			3. Click the first mouse button near the endpoint 
	                   you want to stretch
			4. Move the mouse and the rubberbanding net to
			   the new location and press the first mouse button
			   to finalize the stretch.

		Stretching nets using the hotkey is similar to above
		except that the endpoint is automatically picked based
		on the last mouse position when you typed the hotkey.

		Right now you can only stretch nets, but this will be
		expanded to other objects eventually.  You can only stretch
		one net at a time.

	Slot...

		Slot... allows you to change the slot of a multiple slot
		component.  The component must support slotting (see the
		Components/Symbols section for more info on this).

		To change the slot:

			1. Select the desired component.
			2. Pick or type the hotkey for Edit/Slot...
			3. Type in the new slot number 
			4. Press OK.
			
		Slotting is still in development so expect some quirks.
	
	Color...

		This option allows you to change the color of any selected
		object (with the exception of components).

		To change the color of the currently selected objects:

			1. Select the desired object(s).
			2. Pick or type the hotkey for Edit/Color...
			3. A dialog box with a drop down menu will appear.
			4. Pick the new color 
			5. Press Apply.

		The color change will only take effect once you press
		Apply.	The dialog box will not change to the color of the
		current object(s) (ie it only lets you change the color
		and does not get the current color of selected object(s)).

		You can leave this dialog box up and select new objects and
		change their color by pressing Apply.

	Lock
	Unlock

		Lock and unlock allow you to lock/unlock components in a 
		schematic.  Locking means that a component cannot be selected
		by a single click.  This is useful for title blocks and
		other components which should not be selectable because you
		might have other objects inside its boundaries and clicking
		inside the component (titleblock) would be a distraction.

		To lock/unlock components:

			1. Select the desired object(s)
			2. Pick or type the hot key for lock/unlock 
			
		The components will not be selectable with a single click.
		To select a locked component, use a selection box to select
		it.  This is the only way to select a locked component.

		You can lock and unlock regular objects
		(lines/pins/boxes...)  which is nice when you are drawing
		something and an object is in the way continuously.
		Just lock it and you will not have to think about it when
		you click to select other objects.  However, locking
		an object is not preserved in the file format so once
		you quit any locked objects (lines/pins/boxes...) will
		become unlocked.  The locked/unlocked state of components
		is preserved in the file format though.

	Symbol Translate...

		Symbol translate is used to take whatever is drawn and
		translate it around using a inputed value (in mils).
		This operation is mainly used to translate symbols around
		(mainly to the origin).

		To translate a symbol, just select or type the hotkey for
		Edit/Symbol Translate... and a dialog box will appear.
		Enter the amount you want translate (positive or negative)
		in the X and Y directions (the same value will be applied
		to both directions).  

		If you enter a 0, then all the objects will be translated
		to the origin.  If you are drawing a symbol, zoom in a bit
		and then execute this (0 for the amount), since there are
		still some bugs in this operation.  It is a requirement
		that snap be on and that the grid snap spacing is set
		100 mils when creating symbols.

	Embed Component
	Unembed Component

		gschem supports a concept of embedded components which
		components in a schematics which do not require an
		external symbol file of any sort.  All the information
		necessary to display a component is placed in the
		schematic file.  This causes schematic files to be
		significantly larger, but it makes it easy to share
		schematics with other people or archive schematics away,
		since you have any dependencies on symbol files.  You
		should only embed components when absolutely necessary.

		Embed Component and Unembed component work exactly alike:

			1. Select any components you wish to (un)embed	
			2. Pick or type the hotkey for Edit/(Un)Embed Component

		If you want the unembed a component you must have a symbol
		with the same name in the component library search path
		(other wise the unembed will not work).

		You can only embed and unembed components.  Also, you
		cannot embed and then mirror a component (this is a
		limitation of gschem and will eventually be fixed).

		You can also place embedded components directly in the 
		Add Component... dialog box.

	Show Hidden Text

		This operation makes all hidden/invisible text visible.
		To use it, simply pick the option (or type its hotkeys)
		and all the invisible text will appear.  Visible text
		is unaffected by this operation.  

		This operation is useful when drawing/debugging symbols.
		

	d. View operations (Zoom/Pan/Redraw etc...)

	Redraw

		This option redraws the current display.  This is useful
		when you have mouse/component/line/text etc... droppings
		left over from a previous action.  It is also useful when
		you want to update all visual connectivity cues.	

	Pan

		Pan lets you move around the display.  

		To pan the display (picking View/Pan off of a menu):

			1. Select View/Pan off the menu 
			2. Click the first mouse button at the new 
			   center of the display.

		To pan the display using the hotkey is much simpler, simply
		type the hotkey and the display will pan the display 
		to the current mouse location.  

		You can also enable mouse panning if you add:

			(third-button "mousepan")

		to one of the gschemrc files.  See the section on the 
		resource file for more info.  Mouse panning is very nice
		for small schematics, but tends to lag on larger ones.

	Zoom box

		Zoom box allows you to specify a zoom window for zooming in.
	
		To use the zoom box (picking View/Zoom box off of a menu):

			1. Select View/Zoom box off the menu
			2. Click and hold the first mouse button 
			3. Drag the mouse drawing the zoom box around
			   the area you want to zoom
			4. Release the mouse button and the display will zoom

		To use the zoom box by typing the hotkeys is similar. 
		Once you type the hotkey, the zoom box will start immediately
		using the current mouse location as the first corner of the
		box.

		Zoom box will attempt to zoom the requested area, but some
		boxes are not legal and gschem will do it's best to zoom
		the requested area.

	Zoom limits

		Zoom limits will zoom the display attempting to fit all
		the placed objects on the screen.  

		Simply pick View/Zoom limits off of a menu or type its
		hotkey and the display will be redrawn.

		There are the special cases (like a single horizontal line)
		which sometimes do not display correctly (or as expected).
		Hopefully these exceptions will be fixed someday.

	Zoom In
	Zoom out

		Zoom In/Out zoom the display using the picked mouse location
		as the center of the display (or the current mouse location
		if using the hotkey).  These commands always zoom in/out
		by a factor.

		To use Zoom In/Out (picking View/Zoom box off of a menu):

			1. Pick Zoom In/Out off of the menu
			2. Click the first mouse button as the center of
			   the zoom
	
		Using the hotkeys is similar except that the current mouse
		position serves as the center of the new display.

	Zoom full
		
		Zoom full will zoom the display to the maximum possible
		displayable view.  

		Simple select it off of a menu or type it's hotkey and the
		display will be zoomed.

	Update Cues

		This menu option is obsolete and will be removed.


	e. Hierarchy operations (...)

	Down Schematic 

		Go down into a symbol, opening up any underlying
		schematics.  Basically this will open up an underlying
		schematic of the selected component if it exists in
		the source library search path.  See the Resource File
		section on how to define this path.

		There are currently two ways of specifying that a symbol
		has an underlying schematic or schematics:

		1) The underlying schematic must have the same name as the
		   symbol but have a .sch extension and must follow the
		   _# suffix naming convention.  See the Files section
		   below on this convention.

		2) Attach an attribute to the symbol called
		   source=filename.sch filename.sch is not a path to
		   the symbol, but rather the basename (last file in the
		   path specifier) of the symbol path.	The underlying
		   schematic will still be searched in the source-library
		   path.  You can specify multiple source= attributes.
		   The underlying schematics will be opened in the order
		   that the source= attribute is found.

		If there multiple underlying schematics, they will
		be loaded.  Movement between the schematic pages
		is restricted (to the same level of the same set
		of underlying schematics) unless the rc keyword
		enforce-hierarchy is modified to allow for a freer
		hierarchy traversal mode.  See the Resource File section
		for more info.

		It is also recommend that you maintain uniq names for the
	 	various levels (when using the source= attribute) to avoid
		possible confusion.  The hierarchy mechanisms are fairly
		new so expect some odd behavior (and please report it)

	Down Symbol

		This option will open up the symbol of the selected component.

		Once the symbol is open, the user can edit it and save it.

		At this time, the toplevel schematic will not see the symbol
		change unless the toplevel schematic is reloaded or File/Revert
		is executed.  This will be fixed eventually.

	Up

		This option will move up the hierarchy (if there are pages 
		above the currently displayed page).  

	f. Attribute operations (Attach/Detach/Toggle visibility etc...)

	An attribute is nothing more than a text item which is
	in the form name=value.  It can be either unattached or
	attached.	

	The operations in this group manipulate attributes only.
	Most of these operations have no effect on plain text objects.

	Attach

		The Attach command allows you to take a text item (in the
		proper form; name=value) and attach it to another object.

		To use Attributes/Attach: 
		
			1. Select the object which will receive the attributes
			2. Select the text object(s) which will be attached
			   to the above object
			3. Pick or type the hotkeys for Attributes/Attach

		The order of the sequence of selecting the object and
		then the text items is important; gschem will not allow
		you to select the text items first and then the object.
		After going through the above sequence the text item will
		turn yellow (or the current attached attribute color)
		signifying that the text item is an attached attribute.

		You cannot attach a single attribute to several different
		objects.  You cannot attach non-text items as attributes.

	Detach

		Detach allows you to deassociate attributes from objects.

		To deselect an object of all attributes:

			1. Select the object of interest
			2. Pick or type the hotkeys for Attributes/Detach
		
		All the attached attributes (even if they are not selected)
		will be detached from the object.  This behavior is probably
		broken and will eventually be fixed (so that only selected
		attributes are detached).

		When you detach attributes then they turn red (or the
		current detached attribute color).  This color changes
		allows you to spot text which was an attribute and is
		now dangling (unattached).

	Show Value
	Show Name
	Show Both

		These operations allow you to control which part of the
		attribute string is visible.  Usually you are just interested
		in seeing the value of the attribute, but there are 
		circumstances where seeing the name and value (or maybe just
		the name) would be useful.  

		To use the options:

			1. Select the attribute(s) of interest
			2. Pick or type the hotkeys for Attributes/Show *
	
		The text item(s) should immediately change.  

		These operations only work on text items which are in the
		form name=value

	Toggle Vis

		This operation allows you to toggle the visibility of 
		attributes.  

		To use this option:

			1. Select the text item(s) of interest
			2. Pick or type the hotkeys for Attributes/Toggle Vis

		The text item(s) should change their visibility immediately.
		
		If you make an attached attribute invisible, then you can 
		simply select the parent object and select Toggle Vis and
		the attribute will be come visible (likewise any visible
		attributes attached to that object will become invisible).

		If you make a free floating (unattached) attribute invisible,
		then the only way to make it visible (and all other invisible
		attributes) is to use the Edit/Show Hidden Text option.

	g. Option changing (text size/gridding/snap etc...)

	Text Size...

		This command pops up a dialog box which allows you to specify
		the text size of all text (including attributes placed with
		the Add/Attribute... dialog box).

		The text size is in points (1/72").  The default text size
		is 10 point text.  The smallest text size is 2 points. 

	Toggle Grid

		Toggles the visible grid

	Toggle Snap 

		Toggles the snap.  Be very careful using this.
		Connections between pins and nets (and nets to nets)
		depends on being exactly connected.  Turning of the grid
		will almost guarantee that nets/pins do not connect.

		Before you translate a symbol using Edit/Symbol Translate, 
		make sure the snap is on.    

	Snap Grid Spacing...

		This option brings up a dialog box which allows you to
		change the snap grid spacing (not the grid spacing).
		The units for this spacing are mils.

		Before you translate a symbol using Edit/Symbol Translate,
		make sure this spacing is set to 100.

	Toggle Outline

		Toggles between drawing the outline of the
		current selection or just drawing a box when doing
		moves/copies/component and text places.  The outline
		mode looks better, but tends to be significantly slower
		than using the box (bounding box) mode.

	Show Log Window

		This option displays the log window if it has been closed
		or disabled from being displayed when you start up gschem.

	Show Coord Window

		This option displays a dialog box which displays the
		current x, y location of the mouse pointer in screen
		(pixels) and world coordinates (mils)


6. Files used/created by gschem 

	There are several files which gschem uses.  Here is a list and
	a brief explanation of each:

	*.sch 
		Schematic files.  These files contain components, nets,
		text, and sometimes primitive objects (like lines,
		circles, box etc...)  Schematics do not contain pins.
		Schematic filenames should follow this convention:

			name_#.sch

			where:

				name is a text string which describes
				what this schematic contains.

				_# is an underscore and a number (like
				_1, _2, _7, _13, etc...)  This number
				is used to sequence schematic pages in
				a multiple page schematic.

				.sch is the schematic extension/suffix.
				It is important the schematic pages have
				this extension.

		Schematic files are pure ASCII and will always be pure ASCII.
		gEDA does not support any binary file formats.  The file
		format for schematics is described in the gEDA file formats
		document.	

	*.sym
		Symbol files.  The schematic and symbol file formats are 
		identical.  gschem (or a text editor) is used to create
		symbol files as well as schematics.  Symbol files contain
		lines, circles, boxes, arcs, pins, text, and attributes.

		The naming convention for symbol files is:

			name-#.sym

			where
			
				name is a text string which describes
				what the symbol represents.

				-# is a dash and a number (like -1,
				-2 etc...)  The number is used to allow
				for a symbols to have the same name
				yet different contents.  There might be
				multiple representations for resistors
				so these symbols should be called:
				resistor-1.sym, resistor-2.sym, and
				resister-3.sym.

				.sym is the symbol extension/suffix.
				It is important the symbols have this
				extension.

#if 0 /* this is all old */
		For toplevel symbols which have underlying schematics
		(for a schematics hierarchy) there is a naming convention
		(it's basically what's described above).  This naming
		convection is best described by an silly example:

		Suppose you have a symbol called ales-1.sym (which
		represents an alcoholic beverage generating black box).
		Now this alcoholic beverage black box has a bunch of
		underlying schematics.	These schematics are called
		ales_1.sch, ales_2.sch, ales_3.sch etc...

		So basically the name of the symbol and the name
		schematics is the same (only the sequence numbers
		change).  Now this also means that ales-2.sym has
		the same underlying schematics (ales_1.sch, ales_2.sch,
		ales_3.sch etc...).
#endif 
	
		The new way of specifing hierarchy is by using the source=
		attribute.  Please see the master attribute document for info
	 	on this mechanism.

		The hierarchy mechanism is still in heavy flux, so there 
	 	might be some more changes.

	system-gschemrc
	~/.gEDA/gschemrc
	gschemrc
		Resource files.  These contain guile (scheme) keywords
		which control the various configurable parameters.
		All three files may exist and are searched in the
		above listed order.  system-gschemrc contains system
		wide defaults.	~/.gEDA/gschemrc lives in each users
		home directory and contains project wide defaults.
		gschemrc lives in each project directory and contains
		project specific defaults.  See the section below on 
		the resource file for more info.

	gschem.log
		Log file.  This file contains informative, error, warnings
		etc... messages when gschem was run.  This file is created
		in the working directory that gschem was started in.
		This allows the user to preserve log files between
		independent projects.

	TBA: Suggested format for projects

	

7. Electrical connectivity 

	As you draw schematics you need be aware of what is considered
	to be electrically connected by the gEDA programs.

	Nets which are visually connected to other nets are electrically
	connected.  This connection may be endpoint to endpoint or
	endpoint to midpoint.  When a single endpoint to endpoint (net
	or pin endpoint) connection is drawn then the visual dangling
	net cue disappears.  When an endpoint ends in the middle of
	another net (or multiple endpoints coming together at a single
	point) then a circular filled connectivity cue is drawn.
	You cannot connect a net to the middle of a pin.  Nets can only
	be connected to the endpoints of pins.	You cannot connect to
	a net if that net is not orthogonal (horizontal or vertical).
	The visual cues are the primary way of telling if nets/pins
	are connected.

	Bus are similar to nets with the exception that you cannot
	connect a net to the endpoint of a bus (only to the middle).
	If you do try to connect a net to the end of a bus you will see
	a big red X at the invalid endpoint connection.  Buses are still
	very new so there are still many quirks.

	Nets which have the same attribute label= attached to them are
	also considered electrically connected.  You will not get any
	indication of this connection by gschem, but the netlister
	(gnetlist) considers nets with the same label= attribute
	electrically connected.  The naming convention for buses has not
	been formalized yet.

	More TBA

8. Dialog boxes
	TBA

9. Components/symbols  
	TBA

10. Attributes
	TBA

11. Resource File
	TBA


